<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I: A Title with No Punctuation</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>
				<!-- EXCLUSION 21, ancestor hgroup -->
				<p epub:type="title">A Title with No Punctuation</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-1-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<p>We can assume that any instance of a point can be construed as a themeless fisherman. Framed in a different way, some picked shakes are thought of simply as crabs. Nowhere is it disputed that a dinner sees a modem as a warming customer. The zeitgeist contends that we can assume that any instance of a kenneth can be construed as an entranced belgian. A rotate is a gaumless debt.</p>
				<!-- EXCLUSION 1, epub:type -->
				<p epub:type="z3998:given-name">We know that a caravan is a foxglove's belt</p>
				<!-- EXCLUSION 2, following sibling is z3998:roman -->
				<p>As far as we can estimate, dimples are unspun psychologies</p>
				<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. This should not error.</p>
				<!-- EXCLUSION 3, following sibling starts with 0-9 -->
				<p>Few can name a crafty prosecution that isn't a ranking drill</p>
				<p>3. This should not error, either.</p>
				<!-- EXCLUSION 4, following sibling starts with first thru tenth -->
				<p>In modern times those leads are nothing more than technicians</p>
				<p>Sixth. Nor should this.</p>
				<!-- EXCLUSION 5, class -->
				<p class="y003">Not sure why a class won’t error</p>
				<p class="y003">To prevent a c-008.</p>
				<!-- EXCLUSION 6, salutation -->
				<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear Suzie</p>
				<p>To prevent a c-015.</p>
				<!-- EXCLUSION 7, following sibling blockquote -->
				<p>Far from the truth, some hammy shops are thought of simply as squashes</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>Recent controversy aside, a cylinder is a kilogram's segment.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<!-- EXCLUSION 8, following sibling figure -->
				<p>One cannot separate skills from lanate gearshifts</p>
				<figure>
					<figcaption>
						<!-- EXCLUSION 20, ancestor figure -->
						<p>Look ma, no picture</p>
					</figcaption>
				</figure>
				<!-- EXCLUSION 9, following sibling table -->
				<p>Authors often misinterpret the mask as a toylike snowplow, when in actuality it feels more like a galore organization</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<!-- EXCLUSION 16, ancestor table -->
								<p>Only cell</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<!-- EXCLUSION 10, following sibling footer -->
				<p>Though we assume the latter, a cheery oven is a july of the mind</p>
				<footer>
					<!-- EXCLUSION 14, ancestor footer -->
					<p>John</p>
				</footer>
			</section>
			<!-- To keep above footer from causing a s-078 -->
			<section id="chapter-1-2">
				<header>
					<!-- EXCLUSION 15, ancestor header -->
					<p>This header will not error</p>
				</header>
				<!-- EXCLUSION 11, following sibling ul -->
				<p>Few can name a clinquant sauce that isn't a tother burn</p>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<!-- EXCLUSION 17/19, ancestor ul/li -->
						<p>This will not error</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<!-- EXCLUSION 12, following sibling ol -->
				<p>Scleroid zephyrs show us how calls can be earthquakes</p>
				<ol>
					<li>
						<!-- EXCLUSION 18/19, ancestor ol/li -->
						<p>This also will not error</p>
					</li>
				</ol>
				<!-- EXCLUSION 13, ancestor blockquote -->
				<blockquote>
					<p>Nowhere is it disputed that a gauge can hardly be considered a slimming pepper without also being an iron</p>
				</blockquote>
				<!-- FAIL -->
				<p>This one should error</p>
				<p>(This one doesn’t, but maybe should)</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
