<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>INCIDENT OF THE LETTER</h2>
<p>
It was late in the afternoon, when Mr. Utterson found his way to Dr.
Jekyll’s door, where he was at once admitted by Poole, and carried down
by the kitchen offices and across a yard which had once been a garden, to the
building which was indifferently known as the laboratory or dissecting rooms.
The doctor had bought the house from the heirs of a celebrated surgeon; and his
own tastes being rather chemical than anatomical, had changed the destination
of the block at the bottom of the garden. It was the first time that the lawyer
had been received in that part of his friend’s quarters; and he eyed the
dingy, windowless structure with curiosity, and gazed round with a distasteful
sense of strangeness as he crossed the theatre, once crowded with eager
students and now lying gaunt and silent, the tables laden with chemical
apparatus, the floor strewn with crates and littered with packing straw, and
the light falling dimly through the foggy cupola. At the further end, a flight
of stairs mounted to a door covered with red baize; and through this, Mr.
Utterson was at last received into the doctor’s cabinet. It was a large
room fitted round with glass presses, furnished, among other things, with a
cheval-glass and a business table, and looking out upon the court by three
dusty windows barred with iron. The fire burned in the grate; a lamp was set
lighted on the chimney shelf, for even in the houses the fog began to lie
thickly; and there, close up to the warmth, sat Dr. Jekyll, looking deathly
sick. He did not rise to meet his visitor, but held out a cold hand and bade
him welcome in a changed voice.
</p>
<p>
“And now,” said Mr. Utterson, as soon as Poole had left them,
“you have heard the news?”
</p>
<p>
The doctor shuddered. “They were crying it in the square,” he said.
“I heard them in my dining-room.”
</p>
<p>
“One word,” said the lawyer. “Carew was my client, but so are
you, and I want to know what I am doing. You have not been mad enough to hide
this fellow?”
</p>
<p>
“Utterson, I swear to God,” cried the doctor, “I swear to God
I will never set eyes on him again. I bind my honour to you that I am done with
him in this world. It is all at an end. And indeed he does not want my help;
you do not know him as I do; he is safe, he is quite safe; mark my words, he
will never more be heard of.”
</p>
<p>
The lawyer listened gloomily; he did not like his friend’s feverish
manner. “You seem pretty sure of him,” said he; “and for your
sake, I hope you may be right. If it came to a trial, your name might
appear.”
</p>
<p>
“I am quite sure of him,” replied Jekyll; “I have grounds for
certainty that I cannot share with any one. But there is one thing on which you
may advise me. I have—I have received a letter; and I am at a loss
whether I should show it to the police. I should like to leave it in your
hands, Utterson; you would judge wisely, I am sure; I have so great a trust in
you.”
</p>
<p>
“You fear, I suppose, that it might lead to his detection?” asked
the lawyer.
</p>
<p>
“No,” said the other. “I cannot say that I care what becomes
of Hyde; I am quite done with him. I was thinking of my own character, which
this hateful business has rather exposed.”
</p>
<p>
Utterson ruminated awhile; he was surprised at his friend’s selfishness,
and yet relieved by it. “Well,” said he, at last, “let me see
the letter.”
</p>
<p>
The letter was written in an odd, upright hand and signed “Edward
Hyde”: and it signified, briefly enough, that the writer’s
benefactor, Dr. Jekyll, whom he had long so unworthily repaid for a thousand
generosities, need labour under no alarm for his safety, as he had means of
escape on which he placed a sure dependence. The lawyer liked this letter well
enough; it put a better colour on the intimacy than he had looked for; and he
blamed himself for some of his past suspicions.
</p>
<p>
“Have you the envelope?” he asked.
</p>
<p>
“I burned it,” replied Jekyll, “before I thought what I was
about. But it bore no postmark. The note was handed in.”
</p>
<p>
“Shall I keep this and sleep upon it?” asked Utterson.
</p>
<p>
“I wish you to judge for me entirely,” was the reply. “I have
lost confidence in myself.”
</p>
<p>
“Well, I shall consider,” returned the lawyer. “And now one
word more: it was Hyde who dictated the terms in your will about that
disappearance?”
</p>
<p>
The doctor seemed seized with a qualm of faintness; he shut his mouth tight and
nodded.
</p>
<p>
“I knew it,” said Utterson. “He meant to murder you. You had
a fine escape.”
</p>
<p>
“I have had what is far more to the purpose,” returned the doctor
solemnly: “I have had a lesson—O God, Utterson, what a lesson I
have had!” And he covered his face for a moment with his hands.
</p>
<p>
On his way out, the lawyer stopped and had a word or two with Poole. “By
the bye,” said he, “there was a letter handed in to-day: what was
the messenger like?” But Poole was positive nothing had come except by
post; “and only circulars by that,” he added.
</p>
<p>
This news sent off the visitor with his fears renewed. Plainly the letter had
come by the laboratory door; possibly, indeed, it had been written in the
cabinet; and if that were so, it must be differently judged, and handled with
the more caution. The newsboys, as he went, were crying themselves hoarse along
the footways: “Special edition. Shocking murder of an M.P.” That
was the funeral oration of one friend and client; and he could not help a
certain apprehension lest the good name of another should be sucked down in the
eddy of the scandal. It was, at least, a ticklish decision that he had to make;
and self-reliant as he was by habit, he began to cherish a longing for advice.
It was not to be had directly; but perhaps, he thought, it might be fished for.
</p>
<p>
Presently after, he sat on one side of his own hearth, with Mr. Guest, his head
clerk, upon the other, and midway between, at a nicely calculated distance from
the fire, a bottle of a particular old wine that had long dwelt unsunned in the
foundations of his house. The fog still slept on the wing above the drowned
city, where the lamps glimmered like carbuncles; and through the muffle and
smother of these fallen clouds, the procession of the town’s life was
still rolling in through the great arteries with a sound as of a mighty wind.
But the room was gay with firelight. In the bottle the acids were long ago
resolved; the imperial dye had softened with time, as the colour grows richer
in stained windows; and the glow of hot autumn afternoons on hillside
vineyards, was ready to be set free and to disperse the fogs of London.
Insensibly the lawyer melted. There was no man from whom he kept fewer secrets
than Mr. Guest; and he was not always sure that he kept as many as he meant.
Guest had often been on business to the doctor’s; he knew Poole; he could
scarce have failed to hear of Mr. Hyde’s familiarity about the house; he
might draw conclusions: was it not as well, then, that he should see a letter
which put that mystery to right? and above all since Guest, being a great
student and critic of handwriting, would consider the step natural and
obliging? The clerk, besides, was a man of counsel; he could scarce read so
strange a document without dropping a remark; and by that remark Mr. Utterson
might shape his future course.
</p>
<p>
“This is a sad business about Sir Danvers,” he said.
</p>
<p>
“Yes, sir, indeed. It has elicited a great deal of public feeling,”
returned Guest. “The man, of course, was mad.”
</p>
<p>
“I should like to hear your views on that,” replied Utterson.
“I have a document here in his handwriting; it is between ourselves, for
I scarce know what to do about it; it is an ugly business at the best. But
there it is; quite in your way: a murderer’s autograph.”
</p>
<p>
Guest’s eyes brightened, and he sat down at once and studied it with
passion. “No sir,” he said: “not mad; but it is an odd
hand.”
</p>
<p>
“And by all accounts a very odd writer,” added the lawyer.
</p>
<p>
Just then the servant entered with a note.
</p>
<p>
“Is that from Dr. Jekyll, sir?” inquired the clerk. “I
thought I knew the writing. Anything private, Mr. Utterson?”
</p>
<p>
“Only an invitation to dinner. Why? Do you want to see it?”
</p>
<p>
“One moment. I thank you, sir;” and the clerk laid the two sheets
of paper alongside and sedulously compared their contents. “Thank you,
sir,” he said at last, returning both; “it’s a very
interesting autograph.”
</p>
<p>
There was a pause, during which Mr. Utterson struggled with himself. “Why
did you compare them, Guest?” he inquired suddenly.
</p>
<p>
“Well, sir,” returned the clerk, “there’s a rather
singular resemblance; the two hands are in many points identical: only
differently sloped.”
</p>
<p>
“Rather quaint,” said Utterson.
</p>
<p>
“It is, as you say, rather quaint,” returned Guest.
</p>
<p>
“I wouldn’t speak of this note, you know,” said the master.
</p>
<p>
“No, sir,” said the clerk. “I understand.”
</p>
<p>
But no sooner was Mr. Utterson alone that night, than he locked the note into
his safe, where it reposed from that time forward. “What!” he
thought. “Henry Jekyll forge for a murderer!” And his blood ran
cold in his veins.
</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
