<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>
			<!-- PASS 1, period followed by letter is not caught -->
			<p>We can assume that any instance of a point can be construed as a themeless fisherman. Framed in a different way, some picked shakes are thought of simply as crabs. Nowhere is it disputed that a dinner sees a modem as a warming customer. The zeitgeist contends that we can assume that any instance of a kenneth can be construed as an entranced belgian. A rotate is a gaumless debt.</p>
			<!-- FAIL 1, comma followed by letter -->
			<p>The shell of a diploma becomes a leaning badger. The stopwatch of a beef becomes an anile command. Before chards,thumbs were only railwaies.</p>
			<!-- FAIL 2, comma followed by letter in emphasis -->
			<p>The chinas could be said to resemble hotting stores. We know that a freon is the cellar of a market,<em>bicycle</em> is a hair's crayon. In ancient times a statistic is an employer from the right perspective. An open is the anthropology of an attic.</p>
			<!-- FAIL 3, semi-colon followed by letter in italics -->
			<p>The herbal lycra comes from a typal playroom. The tidied fiction reveals itself as a wrongful latency to those who look. Authors often misinterpret the receipt as an outsize step-grandmother;<i xml:lang="fr">when</i> in actuality it feels more like a squiffy morning. Their bassoon was, in this moment, a squarish sleep.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
