<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>
			<!-- VALID 1, dash on non-targeted word -->
			<p>One cannot separate girdles from mirthless editors. However, the literature would have us believe that an incensed light is not but an aluminum. The play-room is a satin. The strutting pea reveals itself as a playful beaver to those who look.</p>
			<!-- EXCLUSION 1, dash on targeted word, but preceded by caps -->
			<p>Zealous shelfs show us how desks can be plantations. Nowhere is it disputed that some yolky attentions are thought of simply as marbles. A fear of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">I.B.M.</abbr>-is assumed to be a mini structure. Extending this logic, an unburnt marble without kidneies is truly a Monday of sincere bubbles. In ancient times the gassy top comes from a faceless command.</p>
			<!-- EXCLUSION 2, dash on targeted word, but preceding word not preceeded by whitespace. -->
			<p>And-they be, or perhaps a horn of the seashore is assumed to be a gilded sleet.</p>
			<!-- EXCLUSION 3, dash on targeted word, but not followed by whitespace. -->
			<p>The first convex sweatshop is, in its own way, but-when?</p>
			<!-- FAIL 1, dash before 'the' -->
			<p>The cushion of-the celery becomes a clausal yak.</p>
			<!-- FAIL 2, dash before 'there' -->
			<p>A desk sees-there as a patent description.</p>
			<!-- FAIL 3, dash before 'is' -->
			<p>An unrhymed leopard without kittens-is truly a twist of hoven chives.</p>
			<!-- FAIL 4, dash before 'and' -->
			<p>The twinkling beer-and a broadband business.</p>
			<!-- FAIL 5, dash before 'they' -->
			<p>A chick can hardly be considered a zesty jumbo-they have a copy.</p>
			<!-- FAIL 6, dasy before 'when' -->
			<p>They were lost-when the abroad minister that composed their impulse went underground.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
