<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<feed xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2005/Atom" xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/" xmlns:schema="http://schema.org/Book">
	<id>https://standardebooks.org/opds/all</id>
	<link href="https://standardebooks.org/opds/all" rel="self" type="application/atom+xml;profile=opds-catalog;kind=acquisition"/>
	<link href="https://standardebooks.org/opds" rel="start" type="application/atom+xml;profile=opds-catalog;kind=navigation"/>
	<title>All Standard Ebooks</title>
	<subtitle>Free and liberated ebooks, carefully produced for the true book lover.</subtitle>
	<icon>https://standardebooks.org/images/logo.png</icon>
	<updated>2020-06-01T14:42:24Z</updated>
	<author>
		<name>Standard Ebooks</name>
		<uri>https://standardebooks.org</uri>
	</author>
		<entry>
		<id>https://standardebooks.org/ebooks/a-a-milne/the-red-house-mystery</id>
		<title>The Red House Mystery</title>
				<author>
			<name>A. A. Milne</name>
			<uri>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A._A._Milne</uri>			<schema:alternateName>Alan Alexander Milne</schema:alternateName>			<schema:sameAs>https://id.loc.gov/authorities/names/n80067053</schema:sameAs>		</author>
				<published>2019-11-04T23:36:41Z</published>
		<updated>2020-05-26T23:03:54Z</updated>
		<dc:language>en-GB</dc:language>
		<dc:publisher>Standard Ebooks</dc:publisher>
				<dc:source>https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/1872</dc:source>
				<dc:source>https://archive.org/details/redhousemystery00milngoog/</dc:source>
				<rights>Public domain in the United States; original content released to the public domain via the Creative Commons CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain Dedication</rights>
		<summary type="text">An amateur sleuth visting a country house solves the mystery of who shot the man in the locked room.</summary>
		<content type="text/html">
			<p><i>The Red House Mystery</i> is a detective novel by <a href="https://standardebooks.org/ebooks/a-a-milne"><abbr>A. A.</abbr> Milne</a>, better known for his children’s writing, who wrote this book for his father in 1922. It is his only mystery novel and was very popular at the time.</p>
			<p>Mark Ablett is the amiable host of a country-house party to which his estranged brother, Robert, arrives from Australia. Robert is the black sheep of the family who is said to have borrowed money in the past and had written to warn of his visit. One afternoon a gunshot is heard, and Robert is found shot in the head while locked in the library, while his brother Mark has vanished. Tony Gillingham, who has arrived to visit Bill Beverley, one of the guests at the house-party, takes it upon himself to investigate the death. Together Tony and Bill form a Holmes and Watson partnership and seek to solve the mystery in an unorthodox manner, taking over from a bumbling police force.</p>
			<p><i>The Red House Mystery</i> has divided opinion on its literary merit but it remains an entertaining and intriguing read nonetheless.</p>
		</content>
				<category scheme="http://purl.org/dc/terms/LCSH" term="Detective and mystery stories"/>
				<category scheme="http://purl.org/dc/terms/LCSH" term="England -- Fiction"/>
				<link href="/ebooks/a-a-milne/the-red-house-mystery/dist/cover.jpg" rel="http://opds-spec.org/image" type="image/jpeg"/>
		<link href="/ebooks/a-a-milne/the-red-house-mystery/dist/cover-thumbnail.jpg" rel="http://opds-spec.org/image/thumbnail" type="image/jpeg"/>
		<link href="/ebooks/a-a-milne/the-red-house-mystery/dist/a-a-milne_the-red-house-mystery.epub" rel="http://opds-spec.org/acquisition/open-access" type="application/epub+zip" title="Recommended compatible epub"/>
		<link href="/ebooks/a-a-milne/the-red-house-mystery/dist/a-a-milne_the-red-house-mystery_advanced.epub" rel="http://opds-spec.org/acquisition/open-access" type="application/epub+zip" title="epub"/>
		<link href="/ebooks/a-a-milne/the-red-house-mystery/dist/a-a-milne_the-red-house-mystery.kepub.epub" rel="http://opds-spec.org/acquisition/open-access" type="application/kepub+zip" title="Kobo Kepub epub"/>
		<link href="/ebooks/a-a-milne/the-red-house-mystery/dist/a-a-milne_the-red-house-mystery.azw3" rel="http://opds-spec.org/acquisition/open-access" type="application/x-mobipocket-ebook" title="Amazon Kindle azw3"/>
	</entry>
		<entry>
		<id>https://standardebooks.org/ebooks/a-merritt/the-moon-pool</id>
		<title>The Moon Pool</title>
				<author>
			<name>A. Merritt</name>
			<uri>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A._Merritt</uri>			<schema:alternateName>Abraham Grace Merritt</schema:alternateName>			<schema:sameAs>http://id.loc.gov/authorities/names/n50036727</schema:sameAs>		</author>
				<published>2016-09-30T22:24:23Z</published>
		<updated>2020-05-27T02:06:31Z</updated>
		<dc:language>en-GB</dc:language>
		<dc:publisher>Standard Ebooks</dc:publisher>
				<dc:source>https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/765</dc:source>
				<dc:source>https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/007667111</dc:source>
				<rights>Public domain in the United States; original content released to the public domain via the Creative Commons CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain Dedication</rights>
		<summary type="text">A group of adventurers search for their friends, who were lost while exploring the otherworldly secrets of a monument discovered on a chain of island ruins.</summary>
		<content type="text/html">
			<p><i>The Moon Pool</i>, in novel form, is a combination and fix-up of two previously-published short stories: “The Moon Pool,” and “Conquest of the Moon Pool.” Initially serialized in <i>All-Story Weekly</i>, <a href="https://standardebooks.org/ebooks/a-merritt">Merritt</a> made the interesting choice of framing the novel as a sort of scientific retelling, going so far as to include footnotes from fictional scientists, to give this completely fantastic work an air of authenticity.</p>
			<p>In it we find the adventuresome botanist William T. Goodwin embarking on a quest to help his friend Throckmortin, whose wife and friends have fallen victim to a mysterious temple ruin on a remote South Pacific island. A series of coincidences provides Goodwin with a colorful cast of accompanying adventurers, and they soon find themselves in a mysterious futuristic underworld.</p>
			<p><i>The Moon Pool</i> is an important entry in the Lost World genre, in no small part because it was a significant influence on <a href="https://standardebooks.org/ebooks/h-p-lovecraft"><abbr>H. P.</abbr> Lovecraft</a>—hints of <i>The Moon Pool</i> can be seen in his short story “The Call of Cthulhu,” and hints of Merritt’s Nan-Madol can be seen in Lovecraft’s R’lyeh.</p>
			<p>Today, <i>The Moon Pool</i> is a pulp classic, featuring many of the themes, tropes, and archetypes that characterized so many of the pulp adventure works of the era.</p>
		</content>
				<category scheme="http://purl.org/dc/terms/LCSH" term="Science fiction"/>
				<category scheme="http://purl.org/dc/terms/LCSH" term="Oceania -- Fiction"/>
				<category scheme="http://purl.org/dc/terms/LCSH" term="Geographical myths -- Fiction"/>
				<category scheme="http://purl.org/dc/terms/LCSH" term="Botanists -- Fiction"/>
				<link href="/ebooks/a-merritt/the-moon-pool/dist/cover.jpg" rel="http://opds-spec.org/image" type="image/jpeg"/>
		<link href="/ebooks/a-merritt/the-moon-pool/dist/cover-thumbnail.jpg" rel="http://opds-spec.org/image/thumbnail" type="image/jpeg"/>
		<link href="/ebooks/a-merritt/the-moon-pool/dist/a-merritt_the-moon-pool.epub" rel="http://opds-spec.org/acquisition/open-access" type="application/epub+zip" title="Recommended compatible epub"/>
		<link href="/ebooks/a-merritt/the-moon-pool/dist/a-merritt_the-moon-pool_advanced.epub" rel="http://opds-spec.org/acquisition/open-access" type="application/epub+zip" title="epub"/>
		<link href="/ebooks/a-merritt/the-moon-pool/dist/a-merritt_the-moon-pool.kepub.epub" rel="http://opds-spec.org/acquisition/open-access" type="application/kepub+zip" title="Kobo Kepub epub"/>
		<link href="/ebooks/a-merritt/the-moon-pool/dist/a-merritt_the-moon-pool.azw3" rel="http://opds-spec.org/acquisition/open-access" type="application/x-mobipocket-ebook" title="Amazon Kindle azw3"/>
	</entry>
</feed>
