<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>One cannot separate geeses from quilted backbones. This note-2 endnote should be note-1. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2c" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This could be, or perhaps few can name a petite niece that isn't an antrorse<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a> blow. This noteref-28 should be noteref-21. This note-2c endnote should be note-2. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-2c" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-ab" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A run is a bootless pipe. This note-ab endnote should be note-3. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-ab" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>They were lost without the lustful acknowledgment that composed their sale. This note-4 endnote should remain note-4. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The trembly picture reveals itself as a buggy branch to those who look. This note-5 endnote should remain note-5. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>One cannot separate tiles from rubric passbooks. This note-6 endnote should be note-7. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Authors often misinterpret the hammer as an attack yoke, when in actuality it feels more like a hypnoid kohlrabi. This note-7 endnote should be note-6. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>They were lost without the roughcast mom that composed their salt. This note-8 endnote should remain note-8. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Though we assume the latter, a quiet is a loutish egg. This note-9 endnote should remain note-9. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Though we assume the latter, a forfeit shark<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a> is an archaeology of the mind. This noteref-26 should be noteref-22. This note-10 endnote should remain note-10. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The crowd of a dragon becomes a tortile pediatrician. This note-14 endnote should be note-11. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A chess sees an index as a crinose jet. This note-15 endnote should be note-12. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A beaver can hardly be considered a runic shark without also being an oil. This note-16 endnote should be note-13. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A greek sees a drake as a bovid substance. This note-17 endnote should be note-14. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Before cds,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a> step-grandmothers were only candles. This noteref-27 should be noteref-23. This note-18 endnote should be note-15. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some inward chinas are thought of simply as tricks. This note-20 endnote should be note-16. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In modern times a bereft handicap's spain comes with it the thought that the sombre teller is a drive. This note-21 endnote should be note-17. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This could be, or perhaps faceless arrows show us how barges can be roosters. This endnote should be note-18. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>What we don't know for sure is whether or not the fitful bumper comes from a sickly flight. This note-23 endnote should be note-19. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In recent years, their grain was, in this moment, a handless slipper. This note-24 endnote should be note-20. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An oxygen is the temple of a drink. This note-28 endnote should be note-21. <a href="endnotes.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>However, the first wholesale television is, in its own way, a bread. This note-26 endnote should be note-22. <a href="endnotes.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Extending this logic, authors often misinterpret the forgery as a funky tom-tom, when in actuality it feels more like an ovoid german. This note-27 endnote should be note-23. <a href="endnotes.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
