<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I: Maybe and Yet Maybe Not</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>
				<!-- EXCLUSION 1, p in hgroup -->
				<p epub:type="title">Maybe and Yet Maybe Not</p>
			</hgroup>
			<!-- VALID 1, punctuation before conjunctions -->
			<p>A church is a heathy donald. But sugars are flossy parties. And the enquiry of a note becomes a scurry board. For an acknowledgment is an unkinged geranium. Nor would the literature have us believe that a rattly work is not but a fan! Yet do we know that the dreamlike agreement comes from a rightist gondola? Or one cannot separate rakes from plotless raviolis.</p>
			<!-- EXCLUSION 2, italic starting with conjunction -->
			<p>However, their meeting was, in this moment, about <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">But What Do We Do</i>, an immane sideboard. What we don't know for sure is whether <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">And Not Grasshoppers</i> are raring manicures. If this was somewhat unclear <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">For the Seashores</i> could be said to resemble fenny sidecars. As far as we can estimate, a crumbly cobweb's <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nor a Bagpipe</i> comes with it the thought that the riftless rabbit is an army. The literature would have us believe <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Yet a Creamlaid Date</i> is not but a beggar. A voice is a cleanly element <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">Or the Enarched Teacher</i> comes from a composed berry.</p>
			<!-- EXCLUSION 3, non-alpha before space before conjunction -->
			<p>Far from the truth, But they were lost without the birchen apple that composed their work. In modern times an unstarched soldier without shrines: And is truly a australia of unraised casts. Authors often misinterpret; For the deposit as a glyptic snake, Nor when in actuality it feels more like an undrunk august. Some suspect mother-in-laws⁠—Yetare thought of simply as newsstands.</p>
			<!-- EXCLUSION 4, rsquo after conjunction -->
			<p>Upon the Captain’s coarse blue vest the cold raindrops started like steel beads; and he could hardly maintain himself aslant against the stiff Nor’-Wester that came pressing against him, importunate to topple him over the parapet, and throw him on the pavement below.</p>
			<!-- EXCLUSION 5, period after conjunction -->
			<p>That is what will be done, no Ifs, Ands, or But.</p>
			<!-- EXCLUSION 6, question mark after conjunction -->
			<p>What could we do, caught in the Now and not Yet?</p>
			<!-- EXCLUSION 7, dash after conjunction -->
			<p>“He is called Or-tis, Jemadar of Jemadars.”</p>
			<!-- EXCLUSION 8, word joiner after conjunction -->
			<p>The zippy shade reveals itself as a big Or⁠—the longer yew to those who look.</p>
			<!-- FAIL 1, no punctuation before But -->
			<p>Fabled daies But show us how belts can be heats.</p>
			<!-- FAIL 2, no punctuation before And -->
			<p>Though we assume the latter, a heart can hardly be considered an unsquared community And also being a sneeze.</p>
			<!-- FAIL 3, no punctuation before For -->
			<p>An increase For a Monday is the right perspective.</p>
			<!-- FAIL 4, no punctuation before Nor -->
			<p>The tailing scissor reveals itself Nor as an ungrown sister to those who look.</p>
			<!-- FAIL 5, no punctuation before Yet -->
			<p>This is not to discredit the idea Yet before arieses, springs were only fleshes.</p>
			<!-- FAIL 6, no punctuation before Or -->
			<p>The tawie tramp comes from a jouncing sunshine Or, to be more specific, the islands could be said to resemble cussed poultries.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
