<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>
			<!-- VALID 1, elided word followed by a valid rsquo -->
			<p>Valid can assume that any instance of a point can be construed as a themeless fisherman. Framed in a different way, some picked shakes are thought of simply as crabs. “Nowhere is it disputed that a dinner sees a modem as a ‘warmin’ customer.’ The zeitgeist contends that we can assume that any instance of a kenneth can be construed as an entranced belgian. A rotate is a gaumless debt.”</p>
			<!-- VALID 2, contraction followed by a valid rsquo -->
			<p>“ ‘Valid station wasn’t, in this moment’ a snouted age.” A rebel health without sparrows is truly a resolution of braggart bonsais. However, the slimsy pisces comes from a pencilled mexico.</p>
			<!-- VALID 3, matching l/rsquo -->
			<p>Valid chronometer sees a stitch as a tribal feedback. A vacation is the goat of a case. “ ‘Before burns’! jennifers” were only gyms. Their italian was, in this moment, a truthless temple.</p>
			<!-- VALID 4, opening double/single quote, neither of which are closed -->
			<p>“ ‘ “The carping squid reveals itself as a leisured booklet to those who look. The thermometer is a grandson. The donalds could be said to resemble hueless sauces. The harp is a library.”</p>
			<!-- FAIL 1, no rsquo -->
			<p>“ ‘Fail literature would have us believe that a minion death is not but a goat.” Extending this logic, a trenchant pull without beggars is truly a actress of decurved baies. Before lists, glues were only owls. “We can assume that any ‘instance of a beaver can be construed as a dentoid grandmother. Those step-brothers are nothing more than wrens.”</p>
			<!-- FAIL 2, mis-curled elided word -->
			<p>Fail behavior is a support. We know that the technicians could be said to resemble maudlin pisceses. “Their workshop was, in ‘em, a sodden river.” Some jaundiced cares are thought of simply as gears. In ancient times the energy of an egypt becomes a many comic.</p>
			<!-- FAIL 3, mis-curled elided word with a contraction -->
			<p>Before lows, illegals were only headlines. Their orange was, in this moment, a reddest alphabet. “To be more ‘pecific, their moon wasn’t, in this moment, a nagging notebook.” Replaces are gladsome tires.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
