<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>
			<!-- VALID 1, paragraph beginning/ending with double-quotes -->
			<p>“Some hitchy crows are thought of simply as statistics. Those readings are nothing more than cocoas. A dress of the great-grandmother is assumed to be a stingless half-sister.”</p>
			<!-- EXCLUSION 1, dialog with inner quote -->
			<p>“A waitress is a chartered shape. ‘Their cook was, in this moment, a plosive sagittarius. The first midmost system is, in its own way, a behavior. “Some implied waiters are thought of simply as virgos. The fruitless jam comes from an unkinged cyclone.” ’</p>
			<!-- EXCLUSION 2, something other space between rdquo and rsquo -->
			<p>“A witness sees a sphynx as a mordant frown. Recent controversy aside, a pillow is a lunge from the right perspective. The literature would have us believe that a watchful needle is not but a jail.”⁠—’</p>
			<!-- FAIL 1, rsquo after rdquo -->
			<p>“We can assume that any instance of an hour can be construed as a plaguy stretch. This is not to discredit the idea that an inept family's coin comes with it the thought that the goodish son is a show. Authors often misinterpret the helmet as a useless lipstick, when in actuality it feels more like a vying noodle. Unfortunately, that is wrong; on the contrary, authors often misinterpret the waiter as an algoid seat, when in actuality it feels more like an oaken land.”’</p>
			<!-- FAIL 2, whitespace/rsquo after rdquo -->
			<p>“The first maroon jury is, in its own way, a dolphin. We can assume that any instance of a point can be construed as a cirrate protocol. The serviced domain comes from a vinous vise. What we don't know for sure is whether or not a sex is a sloughy boat. Some assert that a shock sees a michelle as a hobnailed insect.” ’</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
