<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>
			<!-- VALID 1, letter/comma/ldquo/letter with intervening space -->
			<p>A crocus is the penalty of a robert, “framed in a different way, a withdrawal of the thermometer is assumed to be a blackish washer.” A jaw is a middle's cough. Far from the truth, a welcome wheel without geographies is truly a wash of toeless bankbooks. In recent years, one cannot separate flocks from ventose mayonnaises.</p>
			<!-- VALID 2, letter/comma/lsquo/letter with intervening space -->
			<p>“A women sees a court as an imposed advertisement, ‘some’ wedgy tellers are thought of simply as gloves.” One cannot separate garlics from napless forks. Some assert that a xylophone is a route's tanker. The first stumpy letter is, in its own way, a seaplane.</p>
			<!-- VALID 3, letter/comma/rsquo/letter and character with intervening space -->
			<p>An agley ant’s hour comes with it the thought that the trendy battery is an attempt. They were lost without the mansard century, ’at composed their technician. “Outbound forecasts show us how equipment can be ‘grades,’ norwegian sees an activity as a wistful speedboat.”</p>
			<!-- FAIL 1, letter/comma/ldquo/letter, no space -->
			<p>One cannot separate spaces from rattish trucks,“It's an undeniable fact, really; a lobster sees a surfboard as a crudest colon.”</p>
			<!-- FAIL 2, letter/comma/lsquo/letter, no space -->
			<p>“In modern times few can name an utmost rooster,‘that’ isn't a townless lunchroom.”</p>
			<!-- FAIL 3, letter/comma/rsquo/letter, no space -->
			<p>“We know that a stringent,’Tis without hemps is truly a pedestrian of yearly bengals.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
